[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Is it possible that your
subjective mind has an effect
on the objective world?
Is it true that mind and matter
are so intimately connected
that it's impossible
to separate the two?
If that is true, how can
you use this information
to not only change your body,
but to change your life?
I'm your host, Dr. Joe Dispenza.
In the previous episode,
we went into depth
on the understanding
of the placebo effect.
In this episode, we're
going to discover
the quantum model of reality.
What you're about to
learn may open the door
to show you how your thoughts
literally affect matter,
that your thoughts matter.
Let's begin.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Much of what we understood
about the physics
of the nature of reality before
the 1900s was categorized
under the concept
of Newtonian physics
or what we call
classical physics.
Now think of classical
physics or Newtonian physics
as the physics of
the predictable.
And when Newton
had his realization
when the apple
fell from the tree,
the realization
basically said things
are moving in a smooth
and continuous fashion.
And when the apple
falls from the tree,
as long as I know the
distance it's falling,
I can determine how long
it's going to take to land.
And because of
Newtonian physics,
we can shoot a rocket to
the Moon with accuracy.
You'll know the exact time
it takes for you to travel
from Los Angeles to London.
We can determine then the
trajectory of planets rotating
around the Sun.
And because of
Newtonian physics,
we have enough understanding
to be able to navigate
in our three-dimensional world.
So think of Newtonian physics as
the physics of the predictable
or the physics of
the very large.
Now, at the turn of
the 19th century,
Albert Einstein and
Max Planck began
to study the subatomic world.
And what they were interested
in doing was just like an apple
falling from the
tree, they wanted
to begin to disturb the
electrons that were existing
around the nucleus of the atom.
And all of us have seen
that classical model
of the atom, where you have
the atom being like the Sun
and you have all these
electrons rotating around it.
And that was the model that was
existing up until that point.
When they began to disturb that
electron and add energy to it,
they expected that
the electron would
move towards a
center of gravity,
towards the nucleus
of the atom, just
like an apple falling
from the tree,
that it would fall in a very
smooth and continuous fashion,
a very predictable way.
But what they discovered
is that the subatomic world
of those electrons
behaved very differently
that the very large world of
apples falling from trees.
The electron would gain
energy and lose energy.
Then it would gain
And instead of it
falling from the tree
in a smooth continuous way,
like rolling down a hill,
it was more like a ball dropping
down stairs, gaining energy,
losing energy, gaining
energy, losing energy.
And they realized that the
subatomic world no longer
behaved like the large world.
So then they began to try
to measure the electron.
And what they discovered
was that model
of classical physics, where it
said the nucleus of the atom
was like the Sun and the
planets rotating around it,
isn't actually the truth.
The way it really is is
that there's a nucleus
and then there's a cloud
of energy called the waves.
And in that cloud of energy, the
electron could exist anywhere.
Now, let me give you an example.
If you blew up the
nucleus of the atom
to the size of a Volkswagen
Bug, the electron
would be the size of a pea.
Now where that
electron could exist
would be the size of the state
of Utah or twice the size
the country of Cuba.
Now, that's a lot of
possibility of where
that electron could be.
When the field of
probability is existing,
the electron exists as
possibility or potential.
So when they began to
measure the electron,
they began to look for
it, all of a sudden
that energy collapsed
into a particle, called
collapsing the wave
function or a quantum event.
Subjective mind
for the first time
had an effect on
the objective world
and the observer
effect was born.
Now, here's the cool part.
The moment they took their
attention off the electron
and they no longer put
their awareness on it,
that electron, that particle,
turned back into energy
and turned back
into possibility.
Now, you may say, well, yes,
that observer effect, mind
and matter, are intimately
related on a subatomic level,
but does it really affect our
life in large-scale events?
Does the observer effect
only work for the tiny
and not for the large?
Well, maybe we're
just poor observers.
And maybe we can
learn how to sharpen
our skill of observation.
So before we go
any further, let's
talk about the definition
of the quantum field.
Think of the quantum field as
an invisible field of energy
that exists beyond
this space and time.
There are no people there.
There are no things.
There's no place to go.
There isn't even time.
It's one infinite field
of energy and information,
that has nothing
physical or material.
And you can experience the
quantum field with your senses.
So quantum physicists for
almost a hundred years
have been trying to understand
this unifying field.
And, in fact, they've given
the name to the quantum field
as the unified field.
And they're
interested in studying
the mathematics of unifying
all the forces that
begin to cause order in our
three-dimensional world.
Think about the Big Bang.
After the Big Bang,
after that explosion,
there was tremendous
amount of order
that was created
after that explosion.
If you observed an
explosion that took place
in this three-dimensional
reality,
there's typically disorder.
And after the Big Bang, we have
order, some unifying field,
some intelligence,
that's governing
the nature of reality.
So then what are
the forces then that
begin to unify all of
these different elements
to create such order?
Quantum physicists have come
up with all different theories
to begin to understand
with the mathematics
how all this energy works
to create such order.
So think of the unified field
as an invisible field of energy
that connects and organizes
everything physical.
We've talked in
previous episodes
about living by the
hormones of stress.
And when we're under the
gun of the fight or flight
nervous system and the
brain and body are aroused,
the very chemicals of
stress heighten our senses.
And we become materialists,
perceiving our world
in three-dimensional reality.
So then when we feel
the chemicals of stress
and we're living as matter,
local in space and time,
then we feel separate
from everything
material or physical.
So think about the
three-dimensional reality
is giving us the illusion
of everything separate.
In the unified field, the
quantum field, the zero point
field, that universal energy
that's governing and creating
order in all
three-dimensional reality,
that energy has nothing
to do with separation.
We would say that this
energy is about connection.
And everything in
the material world
is interacting with each
other in terms of energy.
So the physical reality, we
experience with our senses.
If we can't see our dreams,
we can't smell them,
we can't hear them, we can't
feel them, we can't taste them,
they don't exist for us.
But the quantum model
reality is a reality
that exists beyond our senses.
You can only experience
it with your awareness.
So in three-dimensional
reality, it
has everything that's material,
has height, and depth,
and width.
The quantum field is made of
energy, frequency, vibration,
information, consciousness.
It's the realm of thought.
So then if we're matter
trying to change matter,
it will always take time
for us to manifest reality.
Why?
Because we live in a
realm where there's
an infinite amount of space.
And we experience time
by moving through space.
And so here, I am Joe Dispenza,
one point of consciousness,
one point of awareness.
And then I have my attention on
another point of consciousness,
let's say my car.
So if I want to go from
one point of awareness
to another point of
awareness, I would have
to move my body through space.
And when I move my body
through space, it takes time.
So then based on my
experience of the past
and how fast I walk,
I can determine
about how long it's going to
take me to get from one point
to another point.
So then, here's
me, Joe Dispenza,
and then here's my
dreams, way over there.
And most people
then begin to try
to predict when their dreams
are going to come true.
So they do that based on their
past experience of linear time.
So then their dreams
are way out there.
And now they have
to move their body
through space, matter to
matter, every single day,
to arrive at their dreams.
And, of course, it
takes time to do that.
So if reality is both
a particle and a wave,
if it's both matter
and energy, and we're
functioning in this
three-dimensional world and all
of our attention is on
everything material,
and we understood
from previous episodes
that if you're living
in the familiar past
or you're living in
the predictable future,
then for the most part
you're living in the known.
Now, that sweet spot of
the generous present moment
is called the unknown.
And that unknown is where
all possibilities exist.
Now, let's demystify
the quantum field.
If you took away all the
people, all the objects, all
the places, you
took away the Sun,
you took away the Earth, the
Moon, the planets, the stars,
the light from the
stars, the galaxies,
you took away everything
material, what would you
be left with, and
infinite void of anything
physical or material.
And that fertile
void, just because you
can't see something, doesn't
mean it doesn't exist.
And that fertile void is filled
with possibilities, filled
with unknown experiences.
So then how do we get from
the known to the unknown?
How do we get from the material
world to the immaterial world?
How do we get from the world
of the senses to the world
beyond the senses?
How do we move from the world
of the predictable to the world
of the unpredictable?
How do we move from
three-dimensional reality
into other dimensions
or other realities?
And I want to talk to you
about the formula that
allows you to get there.
So in other episodes,
we talked briefly
about getting beyond the self.
That most people spend
the majority of their life
living in separation, instead
of living in connection.
And because they're feeling
local in space and time
as a body, then they're
using their body
to begin to create
outcomes in their life,
they'll spend the majority
of their life developing
an identity that's connected
to knowing someone,
to living somewhere, to
owning certain things
and living in certain
places at certain times.
And this becomes the
autobiographical self,
that is stored in the
thinking neocortex.
So then when a person
goes from a narrow focus
to a broad focus, and they
take their attention off
of everything material,
and they begin
to open their awareness
not to matter,
but broadening their
focus and tuning
into energy, or information,
or nothing material,
the act of opening
their awareness
allows them to begin to
change their brainwaves.
And you learn then that
if you do this properly,
as you slow your
brainwaves down,
you begin to get beyond
the analytical mind.
And if you're not thinking
about anybody; if you're not
feeling the pain in
your body; if you're not
thinking about
checking your text;
if you're not thinking
about where you need to go,
or where you're sitting,
or how much time you have,
you would begin to
no longer activate
the circuits in your
autobiographical thinking
brain, that has everything
to do with everything
known in your life.
And as you begin to suppress
this part of your brain,
the seat of your identity,
your personality,
and you slow your brainwaves
down, as you do that
and you begin to tune in to
energy, that unifying field,
its signature is oneness, or
wholeness, or greater levels
of order or connection.
And as you begin to
become aware of it
and put your attention
on it, and as you
begin to sense the vastness
of that empty void,
as you begin to focus
on nothing but energy,
if you can begin to keep
your attention on it,
it will begin to create
more order or more coherence
in your brain.
So not only do you
change your brainwaves,
but as you learn you create
more order and more coherence
because the brain's
attention is on something
that's highly orderly.
And we could say
that the moment you
take your attention off your
body, you go from a somebody
to a nobody.
The moment you
take your attention
off your identity
that's connected
to certain people, and certain
things, or times, and places,
you will become no
one, in nothing,
in nowhere and no time.
And that is the moment you
become pure consciousness
and you disconnect
from everything
known in your
three-dimensional reality.
And we could say then, if you're
no longer in the familiar past
or the predictable future, you
are falling into the eternal
now.
And according to the
quantum model of reality,
all possibilities exist
in the eternal now.
That means then, in the now
you're no longer in the known.
Now, you're in the unknown.
And that's where all
possibilities exist.
So to get beyond
your self then, means
you have to become
pure consciousness.
Now I've been saying, if
where you place your attention
is where you place
your energy, and you
take all of your attention
off everything material,
and you began to become nobody,
no one, no thing, nowhere
and no time, and you became pure
consciousness, what if then you
allowed yourself as an awareness
to stay in the unknown?
If you can linger without
a name, without a face,
without a gender, without your
pain, without your disease,
without all the
relationships you have,
without your past or
your predictable future,
it makes sense then
that the longer
you linger in the unknown,
where all possibilities exist,
by very theory the more you
would create new possibilities
in your life.
So then just like in the
quantum physics experiments,
where they were
observing the electron,
and the electron went from
a cloud of possibilities,
the wave function,
and it collapsed
into a particle, all of a sudden
when they turned their back
and no longer looked or
observed the electron,
it turned into possibility.
It's possible then that when
you disconnect from everything
known in your life, and you're
no longer observing your life
from the same level of
mind, that your life can
turn into possibilities,
just like the electron turns
into possibilities.
Now, getting to the
present moment is the work.
The moment you start noticing
that your attention is going
to memories of the
past, that are connected
to certain emotions in
your meditation, that's
the habit of how you've been
thinking up until this point.
And you have to break
that habit, which
means that you have to
return your attention back
into the present moment
and unfold as an awareness
back into possibility.
And every time you do
that, that's a victory.
When you start to notice that
you want to get up and quit,
and you settle it back down
into the present moment
and you unfold back into
possibilities, that means then
you're telling your body
that it's no longer the mind.
And you're executing
a will that's
greater than the program.
And if you keep doing
that over and over again,
the body will begin to surrender
into the present moment,
just like training an animal.
Once it finally can surrender
into the present moment,
if where you place
your attention
is where you place your energy,
and all of your attention
and energy is in
the present moment,
you have a lot of energy
to do amazing things.
So then all those possibilities
that exist in the quantum field
exists as electromagnetic
possibilities.
They exist as
frequencies that you
have to begin to connect to.
So then, what are
the ingredients
that allow us to tune into
those potentials that already
exist in the quantum field?
Well, that requires two things.
A coherent brain, that
is a clear intention,
and an elevated,
heartfelt emotion.
That is what begins
to open our hearts
and creates coherence
in our heart.
So then if you are
disintegrated in your brain,
and that you have
incoherence in your brain,
and you haven't
trained your heart
to begin to become more
orderly and produce
a powerful magnetic
signature, then you
can't read information
or broadcast frequencies
into the field.
In a sense then, you're on
the wrong radio station.
And the more coherent
your brain is,
the more coherent your
heart is, the more you
can tune into those potentials.
Now, let's demystify
the process.
So many people spend their
entire life creating a lack.
They see something
that they want,
like a new car or
a new wardrobe,
and they notice that
they don't have it.
And when they notice
that they don't have it,
they experience
separation or lack.
So what they start
to do is they start
thinking about having that car.
They close their eyes
and in a period of time
they start seeing themselves
actually driving the car.
But when they open
their eyes and they
realize that the car
hasn't manifested,
they start
experiencing more lack.
So then they try
harder to get it.
And how do they try?
They force, they wish, they
control because they're matter
or trying to change matter.
Once you begin to
open your heart,
once energy makes it to
the center right here,
this is our connection
to the unified field.
This is the center
we create from.
This is the center of
wholeness or oneness.
This is where our
divinity begins.
This is the union of polarity
or the union of opposites.
And once energy makes it to
this center, all of a sudden,
like dropping
pebble, after pebble,
after pebble into
water, it begins
to create a resonant
magnetic field.
And that field can be
up to three meters wide.
Now, you're starting
to open up and become
more energy and less matter,
more wave and less particle.
And now, once energy
makes it here,
that energy can carry
information, or a thought,
or intention.
And you can begin to lay
the thought on that energy
because that energy is
consistent with your healing.
That energy is consistent
with your new dream.
The energy is consistent
with your new job
or your new relationship.
That energy can carry the
thought of your dreams.
The energy of
suffering can't carry
the thought of your
wealth because it's not
consistent with that energy.
So then when you begin
to open your heart
and you raise your
energy, and you
begin to lay the
thought on it, think
of the thought as the electrical
charge in the quantum field.
And think of the feeling as the
magnetic charge in the quantum
field.
And how you think
and how you feel
begins to broadcast new
energy and new information
into the field.
And for whatever you
broadcast into the field
is your experiment with destiny.
So then when you get really
good at creating brain coherence
and heart coherence,
and you know
how to elevate your
emotional state,
and you begin to feel the
emotion of your future
before it's made
manifest, then you're
no longer living in lack.
You feel like your dream
has already happened.
So then when there's
a vibrational match
between your energy and a
potential that already exists
in the quantum field,
now you no longer
have to go anywhere
to get your dreams.
Now you are connected
to that field
of information, that's connected
to everything material.
And when there's a
vibrational match
between your energy and that
potential, now all of a sudden
you'll begin to
collapse time and space.
And you'll begin to draw
the experience to you.
And now, you no longer have
to go anywhere to get it.
You are the vortex
to your creation.
So think of it like this.
The thought sends the
signal out and the feeling
draws the event back to you.
So if you are intending
on having a future,
and you're waiting
for the experience
to happen so you can feel
the emotions of your wealth,
or of your freedom, of
your new relationship,
then you're sending
the thought out,
but you're not drawing the
experience back to you.
So here's a great example.
The HeartMath Institute
did a novel study,
where they took
a group of people
that were expert prayers.
And they set three vials
of DNA in front of them.
And they said to
them, now listen,
with all of your intent, we
want you to see in your mind
the DNA winding or unwinding.
And just keep doing.
Keep visualizing it
winding and unwinding.
That's the concept of the mind.
They did it over and over
again, over and over again.
And they checked to see if the
DNA was changed in any way.
And at the end of
the experiment,
the DNA was never changed.
Intention did nothing
to effect the DNA.
So then they said to them,
OK, now open your heart,
create heart coherence.
And just generate that
signal out into the field.
And let's see if that energy
begins to affect the DNA.
At the end of the experiment,
they checked the DNA.
And there was no
change in the DNA.
But when they said
to those people, now
we want you to see
the DNA unwinding
and we want you to open
your heart and give thanks,
that it actually unwound
before it occurred.
The moment they combined
that clear intention
with an elevated
emotion, more than 20%
of the DNA unwound
at a remote location.
A thought sends the signal out.
The feeling draws
the event back.
Or better yet, as you
begin to open your heart
and broaden your field, that
energy is the handmaiden
or it's the carrier
of that thought.
And now you can begin to
affect the nature of reality.
So a fundamental
question is, what are you
broadcasting on a daily basis?
If you finish your
meditation and you combine
a clear intention with
an elevated emotion,
and your heart is open,
and you feel connected
to the energy of
your future, it's
your job to maintain that
modified state of mind
and body your entire day.
And if you can, get ready.
Something unusual is going
to happen in your life.
And it's going to come in a
way that you least expect,
that surprises you
and leaves no doubt
that it's come from your
connection to the field.
And you won't be able to predict
when it's going to happen
or how it's going to happen.
Because if you're
looking to predict it,
you're laying down a
known over an unknown.
You have to live in the
realm of possibility,
in a new state of being.
And the moment you
say I got frustrated
because of a co-worker, I got
angry because I was in traffic,
and you disconnected from the
energy of your future, now
you're back to the
energy of your past.
And don't expect anything
to change in your life.
So then our job then is
to be able to regulate
the state with our eyes open,
as well as our eyes closed.
And the side effect of
this when done properly
are those synchronicities,
are those serendipities,
are those coincidences that
are beginning to come to us.
And we no longer have
to go and get it now.
We are now a vibrational match
with everything between now
and who we are in our future.
And now we are
collapsing our future
and bringing it towards us.
Now, that I've shown you
how your mind can influence
your outer environment,
it's my hope
that you'll use some of this
to begin to collapse space
and time into a new reality.
In the next episode,
we're going to discuss
the difference between
space-time and time-space,
so that you have a roadmap in
order to create from the field,
instead of from matter.
I'm your host Dr. Joe
Dispenza, for "Rewired."
And I hope to see you in
the next episode, where
you go beyond the ordinary
into the extraordinary.
[MUSIC PLAYING]